Here you can find activities to practise your reading skills. Reading will help you to improve your understanding of the language and build your vocabulary.

The self-study lessons in this section are written and organised by English level based on the Common European Framework of Reference for languages (CEFR). There are different types of texts and interactive exercises that practise the reading skills you need to do well in your studies, to get ahead at work and to communicate in English in your free time.

Take our free online English test to find out which level to choose. Select your level, from A1 English level (elementary) to C1 English level (advanced), and improve your reading skills at your own speed, whenever it's convenient for you.

Our online English classes feature lots of useful learning materials and activities to help you develop your reading skills with confidence in a safe and inclusive learning environment.

Practise reading with your classmates in live group classes, get reading support from a personal tutor in one-to-one lessons or practise reading by yourself at your own speed with a self-study course.

Accommodation
To begin with, the environment where a person grows up and lives forms his personality and influences greatly the way he thinks. He becomes a part of the culture of that community where he lives and the ideals, the line of thinking, the way people dress, the way they speak, the types of food they like, all of these are influential and somehow make a person what he is.
1. Where do you want to live: in the city or in the country?
I have lived in a big city all my life. From my point of view, life in a city is much more interesting and diverse (various) than life in the countryside. Firstly, life in a city is more anonymous. You can be who you want and do what you want to do without anybody getting very upset about it (worrying about you), whereas in the countryside everybody knows you and expects you to live and behave in a certain way. Secondly, I find it easier to make friends in the city. In fact, you have a much wider range of people to choose from and to make friends with. The other reason why I prefer to live in a city is that there is a variety of cultural activities available. You have access to a wide assortment of theatres, cinemas, museums, music and dance performances – whatever you are looking for. I can’t but mention that citizens have more advantages in education. Big cities offer more opportunities, therefore highly specialised teachers and scientist are not interested in leaving to the small ones. Moreover, after graduating university it is more likely to find a prestigious and well-paid job in a big city. I love the excitement of big cities.
On the other hand, it goes without saying that life in a big city also has some disadvantages. The first and probably the most significant is air pollution. Cars and smoky industrial enterprises release harmful substances into the air, soil and water and pollute them. It has a negative impact on people, especially on children, and can lead to serious health problems, which may result in heart diseases or lung cancer. Besides this, life in a big city is much more stressful than that in the countryside. The noise, hustle and bustle of huge towns never stop. In this way, large modern cities impose their own living conditions on the people who inhabit them. City-dwellers lose touch with the land and rhythm of nature.
In addition to this, it makes sense to say that I also respect those who prefer to live in a little town. I think they have the advantages of a peaceful life, free of noise, air and water pollution. To my mind, the foremost reason for living in the countryside is closeness to nature and gentle pace of living.
In conclusion, I would like to say that everybody is free to choose where to live. Both living in a big city and in the countryside have their advantages and disadvantages. But no matter where a person lives, he should take care of the environment and be aware of the consequences of his actions. It is not the type of building but people who create a special atmosphere.
1. What does your house/flat look like?
Of course, when we are talking about one home we as well mean a kind of housing a person has got. In my view, to live comfortably doesn’t mean to live in luxury in a detached house, which contains all modern conveniences (appliances). Certainly, it is essential to have modern facilities like central heating, running water, all kinds of electric supplies, which make our life easier, more enjoyable and pleasant. But I’m convinced that all these things are not as important as the relaxing friendly atmosphere at home.
So, I live in a three-room flat of a nine-story building. The design of the building is rather old because it was build long ago. Fortunately, I have my own room and it is quite good because here I can do everything I want without bothering someone else. The door to my room is red and made of solid wood with a bronze door handle and a simply key to lock it. If you look up from the inside of my room, you will notice a dazzling white ceiling and a gorgeous bright chandelier. On the left you can see a large old-fashioned piano, which is made of glossy wood. Here I can play and enjoy the beauty of graceful sounds. On the right there is a wardrobe split up in three sections for different types of clothes. There are stored the belongings of all family members. I sleep on a comfortable double bed. In spite of the fact that it is quite spacious and takes up a lot of space in the room, I can always lie on it with my friends while watching films or TV serials. There are three windows in my room and all of them overlook the playground. Also in my room I have a large wooden desk, where I can do my homework and play computer games.
In conclusion, I want to say that I like my room very much. It is something special for me. Here I can seclude from the whole world and relax. “My home is my castle” – the proverb says. It means that a home plays a great role in our life. It gives us a sense of stability and security. I am convinced that it is not the size of the place where you live that matters, but the way you feel about it.
2. Do you want to move into a new house/flat? Why or why not?
In the beginning, I would like to highlight that the place where your home is located influences as much on the atmosphere in your house as its indoor state (condition). Some people prefer to live in a huge city filled with people and a numerous number of shops, cinemas, theatres and other entertainments, while others are more concerned about the purity (cleanliness) of air and water and choose to live in the countryside. There are lots of reasons why people decide to move to a new place. A part of them try to start their life over again, others make their choice according to the location of their work, friends and relatives. Many people take into consideration the opportunities of certain area. As for me, not so long ago I was proposed to study abroad and it means that now I have to make a decision that will seriously influence my future life. To tell the truth, I still hesitate, but it seems to me that moving to the other country will give me more opportunities and better education. Therefore, it will be easier for me to find a well-paid job in the future. Moreover, I think that it will be good experience to live a little time on my own and get acquainted with the culture and traditions of other nationality. All things considering, it is obvious for every human being that moving into a new house or flat is a very important decision in our life. We should think carefully before make it.
2. Do you like cleaning the house/flat? Why or why not?
In the beginning, I would like to say that doing housework is a necessity because all people like comfort and prefer to live in a tidy room, eat delicious food and wear clean clothes. However, not so many consider household chores an entertaining activity. They think that doing housework is boring and takes a lot of time and effort. To my mind, all family members should have obligations. There are some reasons for it. Firstly, obligations contribute to the development of the independence of young people. Doing household chores children get life experience and learn to manage things independently. What is more, family obligations prepare children for the future life. They teach to make decisions and take a responsible approach to completing various tasks. Secondly, I think that it is not fair when only one person in a family has to cope with all household chores. It is necessary to divide all obligations between family members so that everyone has time to relax and do what he wants. Thirdly, family obligations often involve going to places and doing various things together, therefore they strengthen the relationships between family members. As for me, I help my parents with such housework as washing dishes, cooking food and cleaning the flat. Being a part of a family in most cases brings joy and pleasure and from my point of view, accepting obligations from time to time is a small price to pay for the benefits of family love and support. I believe that children obliged to be grateful to their parents for care and well-being. Such actions as cleaning up the room or washing dishes are the least children could do to show their appreciation to parents.
3. Ask me what my flat/house looks like.
1) Is your flat located in a modern building? Do you keep pets at home? Do you like place where you live in?
2) How many rooms are in your flat? How will you describe your living room?
3) What is the most valuable thing in your flat? What makes your flat special? What is the area of the kitchen? What is your favourite room in your flat?
4) Do you have armchairs or a sofa in the living room? Does your flat have two or three rooms?
5) There are a lot of plants and flowers in your flat, aren’t there?
6) I wonder if you have modern appliances in your flat?
3. Your family is going to move into a new house/flat. What questions will you ask your parents about your new house/flat?
1) Will I have a separate room in this flat?
2) How much time does it take to get to the nearest supermarket? How far is the new flat from the city centre?
3) What are the main advantages of the new flat? What is the history of the house?
4) Is the new flat located in the city centre or on the outskirts? Is a new flat spacious or small? Does a new flat have two or three rooms?
5) This flat is spacious enough for massive pets like a dog, isn’t it? This flat is located in a twenty-story building, isn’t it? There is a university near the new flat, isn’t it?
6) I wonder if this new flat more convenient than ours? I wonder if there some disadvantages in a new flat?
4. Your friend wants to decorate his/her room and make it look more modern. Give him/her some advice on how to do it.
At first, I want to highlight that you don’t have to be an interior designer to decorate your room.
1) If I were you, I would take into consideration some things that represent my character and interests (lifestyle).
2) I strongly advise you to look for some creative ideas on the Internet.
3) It is advisable to decorate your room with colourful pictures, which will make the atmosphere more lively.
4) You should also set up modern equipment because it also will make your room more convenient.
5) I recommend that you ask a designer to help you decorate your room because he has experience in this field.
6) I recommend that you decide what sum of money you are ready to spend on decorations. You ought to think carefully and try to avoid wasting money.
7) If I were in your shoes, I would try to make my room special and unique so as to show guests what a creative person you are.
4. My friend is going to throw a housewarming party. What will you advise me to buy him/her as a gift?
At first, I would like to highlight that it is often hard to choose a gift even for your relatives. Personally, I usually take a serious approach to choosing a gift and the intention to satisfy all requirements forced you to spend much time and money on it.
1) If I were you, I would buy something special and unusual, something that will be useful in the future.
2) I strongly advise you to buy him headphones if he is a music fan.
3) It is advisable to make a gift with your own hands so as to be confident that your gift will be unique.
4) It would be a good idea to give him some money since it is always needed. (We always need it)
5) The best thing you could do is find out the interests of your friend and make choice according with this information.
6) You should definitely buy him some luxury goods because all people want to look good.
5. They say that living in the city is better than living in the country. What do you think about it?
To start with, I have lived in a big city all my life. From my point of view, life in a city is much more interesting and diverse (various) than life in the countryside. Firstly, life in the city is more anonymous. You can be who you want and do what you want to do without anybody getting very upset about it (worrying about you), whereas in the countryside everybody knows you and expect you to live and behave in a certain way. Secondly, I find it easier to make friends in the city. In fact, you have a much wider range of people to choose from and to make friends with. The other reason why I prefer to live in a city is that there is the variety of cultural activities available. You have access to a wide assortment of theatres, cinemas, museums, music and dance performances – whatever you are looking for. I can’t but mention that citizens have more advantages in education. Big cities offer more opportunities, therefore highly specialised teachers and scientist are not interested in leaving to the small ones. Moreover, after graduating university it is more likely to find a prestigious and well-paid job in a big city. I love the excitement of big cities.
On the other hand, it goes without saying that life in a big city also has some disadvantages. The first and probably the most significant is an air pollution. Cars and smoky industrial enterprises release harmful substances into the air, soil and water and pollute them. It has a negative impact on people, especially on children, and can lead to serious health problems, which may result in heart diseases or lung cancer. Besides this, life in a big city is much more stressful than that in the countryside. The noise, hustle and bustle of huge towns never stop. In this way, large modern cities impose their own living conditions on the people who inhabit them. City-dwellers lose touch with the land and rhythm of nature.
In conclusion, I would like to say that everybody is free to choose where to live. Both living in a big city and in the countryside has its advantages and disadvantages. But no matter where a person lives he should take care of the environment and be aware of the consequences of his actions. It is not the type of building but people who create a special atmosphere.
5. What does comfort mean for you?
To start with, a house is not only a building with four walls, it is a home to his owner. If a house is the place where we feel safe, relaxed and happy, the place where we always want to return to, the place where our family live and wait for us, we can name this place our home. There is no doubt that all people want to improve their actual state (living conditions) and do their best to achieve better results. The place where a person lives is not an exception. Each of us makes all effort to create a friendly and relaxing atmosphere in his house. However, different people have different tastes (tastes differ) and as a result, every one of us gain pleasure from different activities. Some think that modern appliances such as computers, mobile phones or TV sets are the only things that bring pleasure, others take into consideration such aspects, as the location of the house, the area of the apartment, the way it is decorated. Therefore, they purchase modern facilities, stylish furniture, decorate their room with some beautiful and unusual things. Having a big family and lots of sociable (outgoing) relatives also plays an important role in the life of many people. What concerns me, I consider all modern appliances significant in creating comfortable atmosphere and can’t imagine my life without them. It is really important for me to always have a place where I can seclude from the whole world and concentrate on some meaningful things. On the other hand, I am quite sociable person and actively maintain communication with others. Being along for a long period irritates me. To sum up, comfort means a lot for every person, therefore we spend much time and money to gain it.
*Everyone would like to bring more comfort to his life. New technologies bring more functionality to our homes and make our life more comfortable. When I am at home, I like to spend time in my room because it is my comfort zone where everything is dear to me and where I feel relaxed. So, comfort means a lot to me.

Education
To begin with, everyone wants to study, because knowledge is a contribution to the future. Besides this, knowledge is often associated with freedom, independence and confidence. Being educated means success and big opportunities. But what does the word “Education” mean itself? Is it important to become educated but can we just live a lifetime without learning difficult definitions or absolutely unnecessary sciences?
I'm convinced that every human should have his own opinion and point of view about such problems. As for me, the word “Education” means a process of teaching, training, and learning especially in schools and colleges to improve knowledge and develop skills. Nowadays it has become a vital factor for the future success and material welfare.
Next, I would like to talk about the education system of Belarus. Education in Belarus is free at all levels except for higher education. The Ministry of Education of the Republic of Belarus is responsible for the running of school system, developing and applying different educational standards, transforming and adapting school curricula. Pre-school education is not compulsory in Belarus, but around 70% of children attend nurseries at the age of 2 to 5 before they start school. Education in primary and secondary schools is required for children from the age of 6 until they are 15 and lasts for 9 years. After finishing basic education, graduates of the 9th class take 3 exams and then they are given a certificate by the state. Then students are able to enter colleges or lyceums. Completion of 11 years of school or a professional certificate allows students to enter higher educational establishments. For this, a student must pass three centralized tests and get up to 100 points per test. I can’t but mention that in 2015 Belarus joined the Bologna Process, which aimed at creating European Higher Education Area.
----------------------------------
In conclusion, it is important to say that education is not preparation for life, education is life itself. Our whole life is the process of learning and gaining new useful knowledge. It is an integral part of our daily routine. Education makes people capable of doing new interesting things. We should always remember that getting good education has a great significance in today`s society as it is a foundation of our successful future. That is why every country spends a lot of money on it and tries to improve and develop its system of education as much as possible.
1. What can you tell me about your school?
As for me, now I am graduating from gymnasium №1 named after a great scholar Francisk Skorina. It is a wonderful school whose aim is to develop student’s talents and abilities. Our school offers the best facilities for all boys and girls from 6 to 17. It also encourage interests and enthusiasm both during and after classes. Here all the students – both bright and average – can achieve better examination results than at other similar schools because the gymnasium not only offers excellent facilities but also strives to high teaching standards and provides a friendly atmosphere. Our teachers respect individuals in our students and help them to develop positive thinking. I think that my parents have made the right decision to send me to this school.
What concerns our timetable, we start our studies at 9 am but I normally come a bit later. We usually have 6-7 lessons a day 5 days a week. The breaks last 15 minutes and this time is enough to change the classroom and share current information with classmates. As for the school itself, it is a quite beautiful three-story building. It includes the classrooms both for the primary schoolchildren and for junior students. When you enter our gymnasium, you will be overwhelmed by its special atmosphere from the very beginning. Just in front of the entrance door there is a tablet commemorating the first principal of our school – Labodaeva Ludmila Mihailovna. It was she who inspired creation of our gymnasium – the first one in Belarus.
Here on the ground floor you will find the head teacher’s office, the doctor’s office, the cloakrooms and the school canteen, which offers good lunches and where our students like to have a rest and chat with friends sharing the news. We are lucky to have a buffet, which is extremely popular with the students. What is more, our gymnasium has three fully equipped laboratories for experiments in Physics, Chemistry and Biology. Here we conduct experiments and carry out scientific projects. This is very important for those who want to study sciences in their future life. Furthermore, our school library is on the 1-st floor and it stores (possesses) thousands of books, films, reference books and multimedia computers. Here you can do your homework, search for the information on the Internet and just relax reading a book. I can’t but mention that our school Assembly Hall also located on the 1-st floor and it is a perfect place for holding meetings, concerts, ceremonies and performances.
1. What is your ideal school like?
From my point of view, every school has its advantages and disadvantages. But what if we imagine an ideal school? I’m persuaded, that every person has its own unique example of the ideal school. As for me, an ideal school should have a wide range of subjects, convenient and highly specialized curriculum and modern facilities. It is a school where a student has many educational opportunities and is on good terms with teachers. If a student doesn’t understand something, he can always get help from a highly qualified teacher. Moreover, there is one teacher for eight students so as to pay enough attention to everyone and an individual approach is applied to each student. It includes identification of the student’s strengths and weaknesses, his personal preferences. To sum up, this is a school where you enjoy the learning process and spend your time usefully.
2. Have you decided what you will do after leaving school?
First of all, education is an important aspect of a person’s life. Studies show that educated people usually live longer, they are much more likely to have a healthy lifestyle and enjoyable jobs. They have higher self-esteem because they tend to learn more and to become professionals in their field. On the contrary, uneducated people can have worse jobs, lower salaries and lower self-esteem, which may lead them to drug and alcohol addiction and crime. Therefore, I want to enter university after leaving school. I would like to underline that it was really hard for me to choose a specialization. Today’s world provides students with a variety of job opportunities and there are many reasons for taking a certain job: professional respect, the passion to serve the society, gaining some kind of social status, earning money. Education in school also plays an important role and seriously influence your future choice of the career. It is time, when you should pay special attention to your talents and abilities, try to fully realize your potential and at last, make choice according to your preferences. Personally, I am interested in the field of information technologies. Such jobs as software developers, computer operators, computer hardware engineers, network engineers, system analysts and administrators are likely to be in demand in the near future. Obviously, each of these jobs has its own requirements and uses information from different fields of knowledge. However, probably a key skill is logical thinking. It means that a person should be able to solve different problems using logic and creative skills. I am not bad at math and physics, so I think it will be a great opportunity for me to work in this field of knowledge. To conclude, every person makes a decision on his own but it is hard to resist that higher education opens boarders and allows you to have an interesting and well-paid job.
2. Will modern technologies replace teachers? Why or why not?
First of all, education is an important aspect of a person’s life. Children go to school in order to learn to read and write. They socialize and develop their communicative skills. All these are influential and somehow forms the main character traits and habits. Surely, a significant role in shaping child’s personality play teachers. Teachers encourage students to study and direct them to move in a right way. It makes sense to say that highly qualified teachers can create a special atmosphere at the lesson, make students listen attentively and enjoy their studies. However, today more and more people choose online education. Almost every person has access to the Internet. It is not an exaggeration to say that the Internet is increasingly interfering in our lives and influences us. Nowadays everything is available on the Internet and it is the most popular and convenient means of communication and sharing information. The biggest advantage of online education is that you don’t have to spend time on the way to school or university. You can get all necessary knowledge while at home (without leaving your home). Besides this, online learning saves not only time, but also money spent on additional materials, books and transportation. To sum up, I want to say that online education has a great potential for development and is likely to be an alternative way of getting education. But I am convinced that teachers will continue to do their work because every day we faced with new discoveries and changes in the education system and therefore, there will always be a demand for specialized people who are able to explain difficult things using simple words.
3. What questions would you like to ask the Minister of education in Belarus?
1) Is it useful to have a higher education? Is higher education in Belarus free? Are there any advantages for those students who became winners of Olympiads in school subjects?
2) How much will it cost to get a higher education? How can you describe our system of education?
3) What are the most popular universities among students?
4) Is it better to get higher education in our country or abroad? Will the prices for getting higher education increase or decrease in the next year? Do you want to combine existing exams or create new ones?
5) All schools and universities will provide an opportunity of distance learning soon, won’t they? The best university in Belarus is BSU, isn’t it?
6) I wonder if I can enter university without passing exams?
3. Ask me about the school I went to when I was young.
1) Did you pay any money for studying at this school? Did you enjoy study? Did you like your English teacher?
2) How many exams did you pass after graduating from school? Where did you study?
3) What was your favourite subject at school?
4) Did you graduated from school or from gymnasium? Did you study 11 or 12 years at school?
5) You had good relationships with teachers, didn’t you? While at school you spent much time studying, didn’t you?
6) I wonder if your parents hired tutors to prepare you for exams? I wonder if you had real friends in this school? I wonder if you cheated on tests?
4. What advice can you give on how to prepare for exams well?
1) Firstly, it would be a good idea to start preparing as early as possible in order to get more experience and practice.
2) Secondly, I strongly advise you to get rid of (avoid) distractions such as TV, social networks and music and concentrate on your study. This will definitely help you to achieve better results.
3) It is also advisable to buy additional books for exam preparation as they contain a large amount of useful information.
4) You shouldn’t forget to have breaks since it works better with a fresh mind.
5) At least, I recommend that you get enough sleep on the eve of your exam so as to improve your reaction and concentration.
6) If I were you, I would listen attentively to teachers at lessons, take notes and do all homework, because it helps to learn the material better.
4. Give me a piece of advice on how to create a friendly atmosphere at the lesson.
1) If I were you, I would try to make all the students participate in the lesson. It will help them to learn the material better.
2) I strongly advise you to allow students work in groups, which will help them to develop communicative skills.
3) It is also advisable to encourage students for giving correct answers in order to make others strive to prepare for the lesson and do homework.
4) It will be a good idea to use modern equipment like an interactive whiteboard so as to create a lively atmosphere at the lesson.
5) The best thing you could do is ask your colleagues for advice, because they have experience in this field of knowledge.
5. Some people think that education is a key to success. Do you agree with it?
In the beginning, it is important to say that education plays the main role in modern society. It directs the person to move in a right way at all times in life. A highly educated person can always manage things independently. It is really hard to fully appreciate the importance of education. However, we always can highlight main functions, which in general can describe the value of education today. Firstly, good education helps to develop personal abilities and skills. It makes us physically and mentally strong. At primary school children get acquainted with reading, writing and arithmetic. Such complicated sciences as Economics, Physics, Chemistry and so on are based on these things. Secondly, education helps people to communicate with each other and gives us life experience. It brings comfort to people’s lives. An educated person will always be respected in any part of the world. Thirdly, education broadens our outlook. Reading books, we learn a lot about the world we live in. Nowadays we can find any information on the Internet. If a person knows more than others do, it will be easier for him to be successfully promoted. Furthermore, education helps us to make our way in society. All things considering, it is hard to imagine modern world without education. It is something that gives us freedom and provides us with a huge range of opportunities.
5. If you were to write an article about school problems, what would you write about?
To start with, problems at school are a part of a student’s life. The most common school problems include poor academic results, lack of motivation for studies, poor relationships with teachers and peers. Probably the most meaningful problem is bullying. Nowadays young people more and more use rude words, which badly influences their behaviour. Moreover, these words can cause a lot of damage to the feeling of others, because youth is the time when a person is vulnerable to opinions of different people, especially to the opinions of his peer group. Many teenagers may not be mature enough to cope with such problems, that is why they go in the direction of crime, drugs, vandalism, drinking and others. What concerns my school, in spite of the fact that all teachers are highly educated and try to motivate students to learn and listen attentively through challenging projects and tasks, there are sometimes boring lessons and some students tend to misbehave during them. In addition to this, some students who dislike some school subjects or don’t want to take tests may skip lessons. To conclude, I want to say that personally, I don’t have any severe problems at school, but sometimes I forced to spend all my spare time doing homework.

Youth and society
To begin with, youth is a period of life, which is of utmost importance in the life of every person. Firstly, man’s entire life is rooted in his early years. The morals and beliefs, range of interests, education, health and habits are all laid in childhood and youth, the personality is shaped. Secondly, it is the time when a person is trying to find his place in the world. People should wisely spend their time in youth in order to achieve better results in the future.
1. What national and international organizations do you know?
To continue, young people are often considered to represent the future because they bring new ideas and energy, are enthusiastic about different things, which can lead to new discoveries and developments that can benefit society of even the world at large. Today young people try to take an active part in social life. They join different clubs, groups and organizations that unite young people with same interests. There they have the right to express their views, discuss the most vital problems that worry young people. These organizations, in their turn, organize sport, cultural and professional activities for young people. Youth associations in Belarus may be organized by citizens of the Republic of Belarus who are over 16 years old. There are several types of youth organizations in Belarus: those, which are supported by the government and independent ones. Among the youth organizations that take place in Belarus are the Belarusian Republican Pioneer Organization, the Association of Belarusian Guides, The Belarusian Republican Scout Association and many others. The most famous and numerous (popular) youth organization in Belarus is the Belarusian Republican Union of Youth, simply (sometimes) called the BRSM. This organization is supported by the government. The BRSM was formed with the aim to unite patriotically thinking young people for participation in the life of society. The main goals of this organization are to develop and realize individual abilities and creative potential of young Belarusians and to accomplish (fulfil) different educational, social and other youth programs.
Next, I want to say that international relations have always been a significant part of the policy of the Republic of Belarus. Back to October 1945 a delegation from our country, which wasn’t an independent state yet, alongside other delegations signed the United Nations Charter in San Francisco. Participation in the United Nations Organization gives us an opportunity to ensure national security and independence today. At present Belarus actively participates in an effective international partnership with the governments of different states and international organizations. The Republic of Belarus is a member of such international organizations, as The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural organization; The United Children’s Fund; The United Nations Development Programme; The United Nations Environment Programme; The Commonwealth of Independent States; The World Health Organization and many others. Belarus takes an active part in the work of these associations and contributes to their development.
To conclude, I would like to highlight that youth organizations do useful work to help young people take an active part in social and political life of the country. Being involved in the activities of youth organizations, young people develop vital life skills. These organizations help young people to realize their full potential and take their place in society. Moreover, they learn to communicate and cooperate with each other and contribute to the development of society.
1. What problems do young people face today?
To continue, there are several problems the young generation faces. They are the eternal problems of choosing a career and getting education, the problem of independence and money, the problem of unemployment of young people and the generation gap. Young people have many problems of emotional and personal character, which may look silly and unimportant in the eyes of adults but appear to be extremely important to the young. They are the problems of friendship and loneliness, as well as the problem of the first love.
Probably the most vital problem is choosing a career, which is really difficult. One thing that makes it so difficult is the responsibility you have to take on — it is widely known that your future life depends on the choice made early in life when your personal experience is not so great. Sometimes you may even be not quite certain about the field of knowledge you are interested in. The second reason is that to make this choice you have to get some idea of the labour market and job opportunities. And finally, there are parents who usually have their own idea of your future career and, in many cases, try to make their child choose the career path they prefer.
Another problem facing young people today is the tension, which exists between parents and children, or the “generation gap”. In their eagerness to achieve adult status and live their own life, young people often perceive some restrictions aggressively and think that they take away their freedom. They believe that their parents are overanxious and overprotective, which usually creates tension. The 'generation gap' problem is really inevitable. Firstly, every generation is unique in its experience, and young people have always rejected or at least questioned the values of their parents. They have always wanted to learn from their own experience, not from their parents' standards. Secondly, every younger generation tends to be more educated and better informed than the previous one; they grow more quickly and enjoy freedom more. Thirdly, parents try to impose their ideas on their children. It results in young people's revolt against adult authority.
The problems of friendship and peer pressure for young people are as important if not more important than the previous ones. Youth is the time when a person is vulnerable to opinions of different people, especially to the opinions of his peer group. It is also the period in life when we fall in love and start dating. Many youths may not be mature enough to cope with such problems, that is why they go in the direction of crime, drugs, vandalism, drinking and others. Often young people are forced either consciously or unconsciously to become involved in those antisocial activities by people of their own age group.
To conclude, I would like to highlight that youth is probably the best time in life of every person. Unfortunately, there are some problems that young people face today. Parents should respect the choice of their children and be aware of the problems their children are anxious about. The support and understanding of parents are a key to a successful development of the younger generation.
2. Have you ever taken part in any meaningful international events?
First of all, I would like to say that youth organizations provide young people with a huge range of opportunities. Youth organizations sometimes organizes some international events, therefore membership in such organizations allows you to take part in various programs. It makes sense to underline that participating in any international event you develop both physically and socially. Young people develop social skills by interacting with each other. Moreover, they cooperate through participating in different activities and this cooperation gives them an opportunity to meet different people and form new relationships. However, in spite of the fact that participation in international events is influential and forms a personality, I have never take part in any of them. From my point of view, I would like to take part in such popular and meaningful international organization as the United Nations Children’s Fund, simply called the UNICEF. The main aim of this organization is to provide humanitarian aid, supply special equipment for disabled children and sport equipment for those in the boarding school. There you have a chance to take part in numerous lectures, projects and meetings, where the participants discuss problems that youth face today. All things considering, young people should take part in different youth organizations to stay up to date and get all necessary life experience. It means a lot that today young people are allowed to choose the organization they want to be a member of.
(Проще: This organization is aimed is aimed at helping people less fortunate than others. Here people who don’t have the ability to see, move or develop in the right way can get necessary support.)
2. Are you a member of any youth organization?
First of all, I would like to say that youth organizations provide young people with many opportunities to develop both physically and socially. Young people develop social skills by interacting with each other. Moreover, they cooperate through participating in different activities and this cooperation gives them an opportunity to meet different people and form new relationships. However, in spite of the fact that participation in youth organizations is influential and forms a personality, I have never take part in any of them. From my point of view, I would like to take part in such popular and powerful organization in Belarus as the BRSM. This youth organization plays a significant role in the development of the society. As far as I know, the membership in the BRSM is required if you want to get a job, so that this organization provides you with the opportunity to start earn your own money. Besides this, the BRSM also participates in many indoor and outdoor activities, sport events and festivals. There you have a chance to socialize and promote your own views. Sometimes it is so important to describe your own ideas about how to help particular people or even people all over the world to cope with the most urgent problems, such as drug addiction, famine, water shortage (a lack of water supplies), poverty and many others. Among the largest campaigns organized by the BRSM are “For Belarus” campaign and “100 Ideas for Belarus” project. All things considering, young people should take part in different youth organizations to stay up to date and get all necessary life experience. It means a lot that today young people are allowed to choose the organization they want to be a member of.
3. What questions will you ask about a new project organized by the BRSM?
1) Do you have a person who fund the project? Does a person get any prospects participating in this new project?
2) How many people supported the idea of this project? Why was this project organized?
3) What are the main goals of the project? What are the main reasons for starting this project?
4) Is this project aimed at improving the educational system or solving health issues (the problem of environmental pollution, demographic problem)?
5) This project is dedicated to the development of charity, isn’t it? This project has many sponsors, doesn’t it?
6) I wonder if I could join the project and help to develop it? I wonder if this project aimed at helping people all over the world? I wonder
3. Ask me questions about the activities of UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) in Belarus.
1) Does this organization defend the rights of children? Was this organization found in the 20th century? Are 4 Belarusian historic sights included in the UNESCO World Heritage List?
2) When did Belarus join this organization? How many Belarusian people are involved in this organization?
3) What are the main programs that take place in Belarus?
4) Does UNESCO cooperate with local authorities or private companies? Does this organization have symbols or some distinctive features? Does this organization conduct meetings in Minsk of in Grodno?
5) Belarus has a great potential for the developing of education, doesn’t it? Countries all over the world cooperate with this organization, don’t they? There is a huge number of programs and festivals organized by the UNESCO that take place in Belarus, isn’t it?
6) I wonder if I could join this organization and help to develop it?
4. Some young people want to become volunteers but don’t know what to start with. What will you recommend them to do?
If I had a chance to give to the young people who want to become volunteers some pieces of advice, they would be the following:
1) I strongly advise you to take an active part in different social projects and activities so as to develop your skills and get experience.
2) It is advisable to search for some information on the Internet or in special newspapers. This will definitely help you to stay up to date and be aware of the most popular volunteer programs.
3) I recommend that you spend at least 1 hour a week volunteering in order to socialize with people get useful knowledge.
4) It would be a good idea to learn foreign languages in order to help people from other countries.
5) The best thing you could do is join any volunteer organization like unihelp, where you can find many co-thinkers.
6) Perhaps you could meet some people who have already become volunteers and ask them, because they have experience in this field.
5. People say that volunteering can make a great difference to our lives and the lives of other around us. What do you think about it?
To start with, volunteering is one of the most honourable and respectful work that a man can do. Volunteering is a form of charity. It has always played a great role in our society and many people regard (consider) it their social responsibility to help others. Some people help others according to their religious beliefs, others want to gain valuable experience and satisfaction of playing a role in someone’s life. But most people involved in charity work because charity comes from their heart. From my point of view, only truly hard working and kind-hearted people can do volunteer work. In fact, there are not so few responsive people who are not indifferent to the problems of others and are always ready to help. They agree to work without pay and I think that these people definitely change our world, they give others the opportunity to live and enjoy the life. Thanks to them, a huge number of innocent lives have been saved. To my mind, every person should be able to sympathize and respect feelings of other people, because it is hard to resist that communicating and cooperating with each other people can achieve better results. Furthermore, we should be able to put ourselves in the other’s shoes in order to estimate correctly the value of a human life. All things considering, it is not hard to contribute a little of your time and energy to helping someone who needs it. Frankly speaking, you don’t need to be rich or powerful to help people as even small actions can make the world a better place.
Другой вариант: All people have some features that distinguish him from others. Every one of us has his own system of values and beliefs. Therefore, such a phenomenon as volunteering can be observed in different ways. If we were materialistic, we would say that it is waste of time and money. This is because only few people with serious health problems can benefit society in the future. They mostly create problems and difficulties and force other people spend their precious time. On the other hand, if we look at this from different angle using the ideas of humanism, we will say that each of us is obliged to help people who need support…
5. If you had a power to solve a single problem in today’s world, what would it be?
To start with, today there is a huge number of problems both national and global that badly influence the development of the society. They are the problems of environmental pollution, education and scientific development, water shortage, famine, poverty, the demographic problem and many others. From my point of view, the most urgent problem in the world is social instability. Not so long ago the humankind faced with the problem of overpopulation. Since ancient time people use the sources of our planet for their own purposes. However, earlier the consumption rate was not so high and nature was able to fully recover. Nowadays, people consume more and more polluting the environment and the planet is not able to satisfy all their needs. This has led to the problems of poverty and unemployment. Every year millions of people have to migrate to a new country for economic reasons. Some people can’t cope with problems and go in the direction of crime, drugs and drinking. I can’t but mention that governments of countries all over the world take all necessary measures to improve the situation. Lots of agreement and conventions aimed at reducing the population of highly populated countries have been signed. International organizations introduce new social programs and somehow try to influence the situation. To sum up, people should reconsider their attitude to natural resources in order to provide next generation with the opportunity to live.
Другой вариант: Previous century has showed us how it is dangerous when huge human and material resources are concentrated in the hands of one person…
5) What is the best way to promote a healthy way of life among young people? Why it is important to stay healthy?
Nowadays, people are becoming more and more interested in having a healthy lifestyle. Taking good care of your body influences greatly not only your health, but also your emotional and spiritual state. I think it is very important to teach children a healthy lifestyle from a very early age. Parents and schools should encourage healthy habits and teach children to appreciate different types of sport. Physical activity should become a routine, a part of their lives, as eating and sleeping. Besides this, it is important to eat healthy food so as to reduce risk of diseases and to give our body the necessary amount of vitamins for the normal development. As far as I’m able to judge, having enough sleep is as important if not more important than eating healthy food, because it helps us to relax and improve the energy level of our body (fully recover after a hard day). I’m convinced, that government should take an active part in promotion a healthy lifestyle with the help of informative banners and posters. The creation of sports complexes and playgrounds will also contribute to improving the healthy level of the population. To sum up, I think that people should take into consideration these facts and do their best to keep fit and stay healthy.

